[Jurassic Pouch](README.md)

# Chapter One: A Visitor from the Sky

_Oats._

The sonic boom startled Fusion the Horse from a reverie.

In the sky above South Padre Island, a silver form descended, a passenger fusilage with stumpy aerofoils, its stainless steel surface glinting in the late afternoon Texas sun.

MaryLiz Bender shaded her eyes against the late afternoon sun and tilted her head backwards just in time to see the cold jets fire. The tail of the shuttle pitched downwards and the ship gracefully pitched over, so that its long axis was parallel to the ground.

Bender flipped the reins gently. “Come on, Fusion, let’s go to the house!”

The horse knew “the house” meant the stable. Fusion also remembered that there was an full extra bag of oats hanging from a peg in the stable paddock, because today was one of the days when the Rocket People came to help out in the paddock, and they usually brought an extra bag of oats in case there was an animal they’d forgotten. An extra bag of oats.

_Oats._

Fusion could see the shuttle falling, too, nearing the horizon under the clear blue Texas sky. _The big, extra bag of oats. In. The. Paddock._

MaryLiz and Fusion arrived in the paddock just as the shuttle flipped tail downwards, relit its primary drive, and landed.

## One Hour Earlier

Jo settled into the acceleration couch. The launch attendant was modeling an uncertain look.

“Please,” Jo reassured them, “You wouldn’t be patronizing me. I’ve never been in 5 point suspension. I've actually never been lobbed. If you wouldn’t mind….”

The pad attendant smiled, reached over, and deftly strapped Jo into the harness, largely unchanged since the dawn of the Space Age. The adjustable straps velcroed snugly into place. 

“This is actually fairly comfortable,” Jo thought, then thought again: “I guess it has to be.” Yeah.

The attendant administered a smart pat to Jo’s shoulder: “You’re good, mate. Have a good flight.”

The attendant closed the egress hatch, wrenched it shut with a tool, and retreated to safety. About a minute later, a chime sounded and the shuttle lifted into the air.

The acceleration was too great to allow one to turn one’s head in comfort, but the heads-up display showed the aft camera view, a plume of incandescent exhaust streaming into the vanishing point. As the rocket gained altitude, Jo spotted the lights of Melbourne, perched on one edge of the midnight blackness of the Bass Strait. Now the lights of King Island, the Tasmanian coast.... Where was Flinders? The shuttle was rolling and pitching over. The view rotated, and settled. There. The Flinders Island beacon.

The rocket’s acceleration slackened slightly as the main engines throttled back. Another chime sounded, and a visual indicator lit: MaxQ. The indicator stayed on for a few seconds and then blinked off. The acceleration reintensified.

After six minutes or so, the main engine cut out, and with a mild bang, the lifting stage separated from the shuttle and drifted away after a brief maneuver of its own.

A chime sounded (unnecessary, after a bang like that, Jo thought), and the ZeroG indicator lit.

Legally, no one could stop Jo from unfastening the harness buckle and enjoying the brief period of microgravity, but doing so would instantly indemnify KoalaSpace, Ltd., its shareholders, and board of directors, against any and all civil claims arising from 'inadvertant decorporealization' that might be visited upon Jo’s person upon landing, whether or not the harness was successfully refastened before reentry, and whether or not said safety harness were ever found.

Jo was happy to take the hint, rather boldly stamped (if less bluntly stated) in legalese on a metal placard riveted to the console, which reminded Jo of the arbitration clause which specifically excluded the testimony of space coroners and their pesky inquests.  

With the touch of a pad, the observation window shutter opened, and Jo rolled the shuttle over in mollyguard mode. The Pacific ocean rolled into view overhead.

There wasn’t much to see, and that fact was remarkable. From this altitude and trajectory, the earth appeared to be all ocean, speckled here and there with tiny islands. A planet made of water.

Another chime sounded. EDL. Entry, Descent, and Landing. The window shutter whirred shut, and the shuttle changed its orientation. The passenger compartment gimballed in sync with the ship’s rotation to keep Jo’s back to the direction of deceleration.

The display switched to forward telescopic view, focused on the horizon towards which the shuttle was racing in ballistic free fall. What Jo thought to be first sight of land turned out to just be the haze of the thicker part of the atmosphere, seen edge-on. But there! (The computer locked focus.) North America?

Baja. Now North America proper. The computer locked radar, and a cold jet fired. The view turned southward by a degree, and Baja scrolled out of view to the left. The EDL clock read -12:48. Thirteen minutes to go.

Jo’s stomach growled. Texas food had better be good.

## One Hour Later

The oats were good. Fusion licked the bottom of the bag clean, grateful for the Rocket People and their inability to count anything without the use of second order partial differential equations.

MaryLiz opened the gate to the farrier stall and knocked on the cedar gatepost. Frances, the ranch’s large animal veterinarian, was installing a commercial-grade power outlet at the end of a fresh-looking run of conduit.

“Hey Frances, Jo just landed.”

“Long way back to Melbourne if Stapledon forgot their Visa. Looking forward to meeting ‘em.” Frances stripped 4.5 millimeters of insulation from the end of the new neutral wire.

“Yes! Me too! And...”, MaryLiz paused. Frances cared about language and the meanings of words.

“You said I could borrow the Camry? To pick up Jo?”

Frances looked up, and then, philosophical.

“I did say that you could borrow my Camry.”

“Come on, Jo’s from out of town. You’ll like ‘em.”

“From Australia. Don’t they have weird abrasive stuff there, like antigravity sand and upside down gold mines?” Frances smiled, doing it deliberately now.

“I’ll have to ask. Better still, you can, yourself. Soon as we get back. Keys, please.”

“Use the tarp in the trunk when you load all the gear.”

“I will. Keys?”

“Judging from the ascent profile, Melbourne launched 70 kilos over the ticketed mass. I don’t know who paid for that, but I’m glad it ain’t us. The keys are in the car.”

“Thanks!” MaryLiz opened the gate and headed for the driveway. 

Frances shouted after her. “Hey, Cap, I forgot to tell you. We’re down three bags of oats!”

...

MaryLiz parked at Arrivals and the sliding glass doors allowed her entry. As she walked through the largely deserted concourse, she thought, I should have printed a placard: JO STAPLEDON. It would be funny: standing alone at the baggage claim to welcome the day’s only scheduled ballistic commuter. And now, there was Jo.

“Dr Stapledon!” The two clasped hands,

“Please, call me Jo, I’m not long on ceremony.” Stapledon’s Australian accent was wonderful. MaryLiz wondered how her own partly affected Texas twang sounded to Aussie ears.

“OK, Jo. Great, thank you so much for coming. Um, let’s grab an autocart.”

The scientist and the astronaut loaded up the considerable pile of cargo that had accompanied Jo through the upper atmosphere, and walked outside, Jo’s first blast of North American air. There was a faint seacoast breeze, with a faint bouquet of petrochemicals from distant refineries and storage farms. 
 
The two were followed at a discrete distance by the autocart, which beeped comfortingly to itself. The sun was low in the sky. Jo glanced in its direction, to the southwest, marveling to see the sun set twice in less than eight hours.

“It was getting towards midnight when I left Melbourne an hour ago. They told me not to eat before I flew, and I couldn’t spare the launch mass of a sandwich.”

“Rocket lag, I get it. Fortunately, it works in your favor, you’ve still got a whole night to catch up to Texas time. Food. There’s the Sustainamart, but it’s not quite on our way. If you can hold out fifteen minutes till we get to the ranch, a feast awaits.”

“Sounds good -- though no fresh Wallaby, for me, if you decide to set a menu in my honor. I’m a placental-mammal-only synthevore, by inclination.”

“Wouldn’t dream of it, although one ‘fresh’ we do have is ‘out of Wallaby’.”

“Fair dinkums.” MaryLiz would have to look that one up.

There was no good way to broach the subject. “Any thoughts on our ‘situation’?” MaryLiz raised her index fingers from the steering wheel to make air quotes around the word.

“After dinner talk.”

“Yes, of course.” But MaryLiz found it hard not to. She glanced towards the back seat of the battered old Toyota. “You’re packing some good looking kit. Medical placard, bio-seal, active cryo. Someone’s taking our little discovery seriously.”

“Yes, all that. Thanks for helping me lift it.”

“Happy to do it. The active cryo, I hadn’t seen one of newer ones. They let you keep it running while it was in flight? I guess that explains the official looking paperwork.”

Jo’s poker face cracked for a split second. “Oh, it’s official all right. UNESCO priority payload, all we asked for, bit more for rainy days.”

Days. Jo really needed to eat. Jo glanced around the dashboard of the vintage economy car.

“Hey, do you actually have cassette tapes for this thing?”

[Next: Chapter Two: The Poop Talk](ch02.md)
