[Previous Chapter](ch01.md) [TOC](README.md) [Next Chapter](ch03.md)

# Chapter Two: The Poop Talk

The lights were darkened in the Mess. Frances had the floor.

“I started noticing the castings while doing dung surveys down in the Rio Grande Valley.”
Frances laid a photographic transparency onto the overhead projector.
There was a suppressed sigh among a couple of ranchers who considered themselves as familiar with
Frances’ ‘Poop Talk’ as anyone needed to be.

“First, I thought it was hare, because of the grassy composition, but I did evaporative moisture analysis,
and it’s way too dry. What’s more, it didn’t dry out after it was deposited: it appears to have formed that
way in the gut of the animal. Then there’s the size distribution. On this plot… here, you can see the
median and the range.

“If the source were non-indigenous deer migration from the north, or south, we’d find adult-sized
coprolites, but the only ones found are no bigger than those cast by juvenile deer. Do any species of
deer or hare within a thousand kilometers of here produce scat of the moisture content I identified? I’ve
got a grad student trying to find out, but as you’re about to see, the point may well be moot.”

“I wondered, what has especially dry, grassy poop? I did a web search. I will say, I doubted my sanity.
By the time the sun went down, we’d deployed fifty infrared wildlife cameras with pretty good
coverage of a ten hectare plot, smack dead in the center of what my students are calling Mystery Poop
Valley.”

The only sound in the room was the creak of the floorboard as one of the ranchers leaned forwards
towards the projection screen. This part was actually pretty cool, even the second time around.

MaryLiz had seen it, too, the night it was transmitted. Her gaze shifted to Jo, motionless on the edge of
their chair, fork suspended in mid flight.

“Commercial wireless bandwidth is sketchy in that area – it is pretty remote from human beings – so
we could only audit a fraction of the cameras in real time. The rest were just recording to their local
storage. This is what we saw.”

The screen lit up with a matrix of ten camera views. Trees of a ghostly pale green were visible in most
of the scenes, framing a lush river valley, covered in grass. A clock in one corner of the screen ticked
off playback time faster than reality: this was time lapse photography.

“It’s all in false color, obviously: none of this is visible light. Nothing much happens until about four in
the morning. And then….”

The timecode counters slowed to tick off frames in real time. One of the views, whose motion capture
algorithm had triggered first, zoomed to fill the entire screen. Jo heard it before seeing it, a rough
scraping against the shell of the camera that had broadcast the stream. Then, blurred inside the near
limit of the camera’s depth of field, a finger? And then two, and then, nothing.

A low creature hopped into view of the camera. Like a hare, with powerful haunches. Big as a juvenile
deer, but stockier. And no hare, nor deer, stood on two legs like that, not just like that.

The animal turned, and faced back towards the camera. Jo mouthed the word no, but it was an
identification any undergrad in Jo’s field would have instantly aced, even with poorer imaging
equipment than this. Unmistakable.

The creature loped towards the camera. Jo shrunk backwards involuntarily as the near field
characteristics of the lens kicked in, grotesquely distorting the scale of the animal’s outstretched hands.

Suddenly, the view showed only the pre-dawn sky, as the camera, and the stake it was mounted on,
were yanked from the soil.

After that, the screen showed only chaotic flashes of undergrowth with a crackling soundtrack as the
camera was dragged along the ground. The video ended in a blurred freeze frame of a tuft of grass.

“That’s the camera going out… being dragged out… of the range of our radio repeater.”
The view returned to the composite matrix of the surviving cameras. For a moment, nothing unusual
occurred. Then, one by one, each of the remaining live cameras began to meet the same fate. In the
field of view of the first two cameras to be snatched, Jo could again see occasional glimpses of the
thief. The agile hands, the facial markings, the ever attentive ears…..

Two more cameras disappeared, then three. The final pair lasted a good five minutes longer before
meeting the same fate within ten seconds of each other.

Frances set the projection lamp to cool, and raised the room light. The presentation was almost over. It
was time to find out if Jo Stapledon was really worth the expenditure of many precious times their
weight in liquid hydrogen.

The question hung in the air.

“So,” said Jo. “You’ve got a wallaby.”

“Not a wallaby, several wallabies. The three cameras that were taken at virtually the same time were
thirty meters apart. If it was a single individual, it’d have had a maximum of one and a quarter seconds
to travel that thirty meters. They’re fast, but not that fast. It’s not just one.”

“Three wallabies,” breathed Jo.

“There’s one more thing. As soon as daylight hit, we drove back out to the valley to see what the other
cameras might have recorded, the ones we didn’t have live radio bandwidth for.”

“OK, hit me.”

“We found nothing. That is to say, there were no cameras. The wallabies had discovered and removed
all forty of them, without exception and without a trace.”

“And that’s when you called me?”

“Who else should we have called?”

Jo was still gobsmacked. “It’s truly an unexpected....”

“Yes, you’re right, it’s very unexpected!”, exclaimed Frances. “Fifty near-infrared cameras ain’t cheap.
If I knew the little buggers were going to take the whole shooting match, I’d have done them the
courtesy of leaving a note so they could steal our radio repeater, too.”

“Where’s the radio repeater?” Jo asked.

“It’s on a test bench in the shop,” said Frances.

“No,” said Jo, “I mean, where was it deployed the night you used it to stream the cameras?”

“Oh. I tied it to a tree branch with a cable tie. Along with a fourteen hour external battery. They didn’t take
that, either.”

“What kind of tree?”

“I don’t know, a kinda scrubby Texas one. Ask me more questions about Zoology.”

“Is it one that a child could climb?”

“Sure, a motivated one. I climbed it myself a little bit to hang the repeater up there: I wanted good
range out of it. Why?”

“OK,” said Jo. “I’m trying to rule out tree kangaroo.”

Francis was starting to wonder why it was necessary to hold back.

“Why can’t we rule out every kangaroo? In south Texas? Why are they here? What are they doing?”

It was becoming clear to the ranch hands, that, even with the planet’s greatest experts in the room, the
group was out of their collective depth.

It was MaryLiz’s meeting to chair: she’d pulled strings with three different space agencies, a
University, and two national governments in order to arrange it.

MaryLiz took in a gentle breath and stretched, breathing out without a sigh: Jo could sense that this was
a signal for the room to go quiet, which is what happened.

“Let’s list what we know. What are our data sources? The cameras. They’re gone, obviously. But,
where did they go? We know the questions we need to answer, but what can we tell from what we
already know that we’re not already seeing? And what questions are we not asking?”

This was something to move forward on. Jo turned to Frances.

“I’m gonna wanna see your poop.”

Frances smirked. “I can’t wait to show you. This way, please.”

MaryLiz stopped them. “Frances, wait. You set up my wifi router.”

“In your office, and out in the stable area, sure I did. They’re easy.”
“You set up the repeater for the wildlife cams, too. Can you think of any way we could get a fix on
where those cameras all went, from examining the repeater?”

“I already thought about it. Probably not. Most of the cameras didn’t have GPS, and the ones that did
weren’t transmitting it in any way that we captured. We knew where we put them, and didn’t think it’d
be important.” Frances was not in any way over the stolen cameras. “But, you know I mostly do
animals. Ask a real network engineer. I gotta go show Jo my poop.”

“Capiche,” said MaryLiz. “You do you. And… I know someone I can call.”

Frances brightened up. “You gonna call Rad?”

“Yep,” said MaryLiz, “I’m gonna call Rad.”

Frances sighed. “Rad.”

[Previous Chapter](ch01.md) [TOC](README.md) [Next Chapter](ch03.md)
