[Previous Chapter](ch02.md) [Jurassic Pouch: TOC](README.md) [Next Chapter](ch04.md)

# Chapter Three: Rad

“Bendy!” said Rad, when MaryLiz appeared on the screen. “What planet are you even on?”

“Cap’n Bendy to you! Same planet as you, today, I hope,” said MaryLiz. It was their ritual greeting.

“I’m down in Texas.”

“Deep in the Heart Of?”

“The very same! How are you, old friend?”

“I’m living the dream, or someone else’s! I’m in Kansas City, I’m not sure which one! What time is it there?”

“I’m in Texas, silly, it’s after three in the morning, same as you, no matter what Kansas City you’re in.”


“3:42 AM. Lovely. Should we sync our watches?” said Rad. MaryLiz could hear music playing in the background.

“Knowing you, we already have.[^1] Rad, we have a real puzzle down here. Something I think you might enjoy taking a look at.”

“My brain is open.”

“Say you were in a coffee shop, and one by one, everyone’s devices were stolen and dragged out of wifi range. Could you figure out where they went?”

“Yeah, because I took ‘em. Seriously? Sure, if I had ping data. It means….”

“I know what ping is. That’s the problem. We don’t have it. We have the router that was used: it’s a simple minded wifi repeater with a better than average aftermarket antenna soldered onto it. It wasn’t set up to log anything.”

Rad could tell that Bendy was serious. “I bet Frances bought it from a thrift store in Houston. What kind of data was coming from the client devices?”

“Livestreams. Video with sound. Ten cameras’ worth, transmitting simultaneously. Ex-NASA gear, high resolution and frame rate. We recorded as much as we received. It’s about a terabyte overall, but we’ve prepared edited down versions for the time period of interest.”

“The raw video, though...you have it uncompressed?”

“Well, yes. At least, we didn’t compress what we received any more than the cameras may have on their own, prior to transmission. We do have the raw streams, glitches and all.”

“OK, good. You say streaming. Just blasting frames out over the repeater to whatever client is listening?”

“Yes. I think Frances called it “multicast”. The video is pretty good for what it is, but among 10 streams there’s little dropouts here and there where the image freezes and we miss a few frames.”

“That actually might be useful. I’ll send you a folder link. Upload what you have. Oh, and send me a map of where all this gear was on the night in question, as much detail as you can. If you know what video goes with what camera location, make that apparent as well.”

“You’re golden, Rad.”

“Platinum-Iridium standard. Takes one to know one, Bendy.”

[^1]: While still young, Rad had proposed an elegant series of refinements to the network standard protocols for the management of time synchronization across great distances, large relative accelerations, or objects moving at great speeds with respect to one another, the realm of General Relativity.

Part of Rad’s work was theoretical, defining the limits of information that could be reliably received from a source nearing the event horizon of a black hole, before the weird combined effects of quantum mechanics and warped space-time overwhelmed the signal. An important practical side effect was improved communication with deep space probes, even older ones, so long as they were capable of being reprogrammed in the twilight of their decades-old missions.

Rad also supplied new proofs of the computational limits of algorithms that could be employed to implement several of the proposed improvements, and a separate proof of the most efficient architecture for implementing the algorithms in hardware. Rad had duly applied and received patents for many of these ideas, but was not asking for any money for their adoption. The solar system’s time keeping standards community gratefully voted in most of Rad’s innovations.

There was still one archaic aspect of timekeeping that the 22nd century would still not let go, however, and Rad couldn’t stand it. Rad was a Time Zone Abolitionist.

It wasn’t that Rad had something in particular against the basic concept of local time. No, Rad had something against everything about time zones, in general. They needed to go, and Rad’s new admittedly niche) fame and notoriety allowed Rad to say so, vociferously, and often.

Had Rad not gone to the trouble of publishing a refereed paper on the absolute obsolescence of time zones, and had not that paper been read and commented widely upon, within the horological community? The same community which had elected Rad the first ever Internet Relativity Time Authority by the IETF?

Along with this eccentric and public screed, Rad waged a private war against time zones. Time server software written to Rad’s own specifications ran as a background process, 24/7, on every device Rad owned, hurling time synchronization signals into the aether to any other device in range that might be curious to know the time of day. Rad’s time servers did this under color of authority conferred by a Class A Relativity Time encryption certificate, helpfully issued and signed by the planet’s Internet Relativity Time Authority. Who was, of course, Rad.

The problem was that Rad had configured the time servers to serve UTC time exclusively, no matter what the requested timezone offset. This rendered some older citizens’ devices unusable, and Rad had picked up coffee money by helping such citizens set their devices to keep UTC natively. “You just have to remember the local offset wherever you are, and subtract the difference in your head.”

This behavior resulted in Rad being banned from every coffee shop in town. Rad took this as divine inspiration, and wrote a sternly worded message on social media. From now on, Rad would travel the world in an electric caravan, broadcasting time synchronization signals wherever they might be “needed”.


[Previous Chapter](ch02.md) [Jurassic Pouch: TOC](README.md) [Next Chapter](ch04.md)
