[Jurassic Pouch](README.md)

[Previous: Chapter Eight: Wallab-Eve](ch08.md)

# Chapter Nine: In the Wind

It was high tide on the Gulf of Mexico at South Padre Island, and the Clarke Bar was hopping tonight. 

The maximum height of lunar tide, many locals noted, often coincided with high times at the Clarke. Whether this was plain coincidence or an effect of moon-curved spacetime was a frequent subject of debate between the rocket people and surfer communities who comprised the Clarke's regular clientele, with a surprising mix of surfers and spacers on either (and sometimes both) side(s) of the argument.

The bartender heard and felt Merl approach before the ranch hand hove into view, through the vibrations transmitted through the plank floor of the saloon. Merl wore hobnail cowboy boots which were their own self contained foley effect. 

The last thing Merl remembered going on at the ranch was MaryLiz throwing a weary glance in Merl’s direction.

Cap was on the phone with a hurricane modeling bigwig in Baton Rouge. Frances and Jo argued over an old low-resolution weather map. 

The phrase “raft migration” kept coming up in conversation. After not uttering a sound for an hour, Merl asked "What is that?"

MaryLiz blushed. _We should have explained it._ "Frances?"

The veteranarian faced the ranch hand and spoke directly: "Exactly what it sounds like. Animals and other non sea-water tolerant species, like seeds, can get blown across great stretches of water by nothing more than the wind, provided they have a raft to float on. For a lot of seeds, the seed itself is a perfect raft, so plant species can migrate across an ocean from one continent to another, thousands of kilometers away.

Merl said, "You said 'float'. Our Pooper and their kinfolk had rafts. Made of what? They made them?" 

Frances sighed. "Yes, rafts. We think, in this case, coastal driftwood, accumulated over decades of minor storm events, then dislodged with a vengeance by a strong Hurricane." 

MaryLiz saw Merl catch her glance. There was only one question in Merl’s eyes. MaryLiz nodded. Yes. Get out. Get out of here, while you can. 

Back in the here and now of the Clarke Bar, Merl raised a silent toast to Bender. Thank you, Cap.

Someone was trying to coax the karaoke machine into operation. Merl’s knew that they would fail, because the bartender, Purvis, kept the electrical safety fuse for the machine safely locked in the bar’s cash drawer.

One of the wallaby trappers from Texas Wildlife Service settled at the bar, glass and phone in hand, with a nod of recognition towards Merl. Neither one of them felt like talking shop. The TWS officer set the glass on the bar top, and resumed flipping through photographs from the day’s efforts. The sounds of ordinary non-marsupial-chasing life washed over them. Merl was almost jealous.

An out of towner tipsied to the bar to ask about the karaoke machine, but quickly became distracted by the wildlife agent’s photos.
 
“What’re those?!”

The TWS agent shrugged. “All in a days work. Wild day, here, check ‘em out. You won’t believe it....”

Merl took a healthy sip of beer, found a quiet spot outside, behind the angled wall of shipping containers that formed the back of the Clarke, and called Cap direct. The phone was still ringing as a crowd gathered around the young wildlife worker and their gallery of cute but impossible photos.

***

MaryLiz’s phone beeped. It was Merl. Merl was a text only kind of ranch hand. MaryLiz answered.

“Cap’n, Merl. I’m at the Z. I know you wanted to keep things quiet, but the cat’s probably outta the pouch, news wise. Thought you’d wanna know. It wasn’t me.”

MaryLiz took a breath.

“Merl, thanks for calling. This was bound to happen, with so many people involved. Don’t worry about it. If anyone asks you questions, just remember that anything you say is likely to be misreported. Remember where you are. But I can’t think of a single thing you would need to keep a secret. We’ve got cooperation from every agency this side of the Rio Grande. You’re doing a great job. You’re part of the story. Enjoy your night off.”

Merl digested what she’d said. Over the phone, MaryLiz could hear loud music start to play, as if a PA system had been suddenly switched on. An impossibly loud yell of “TESTING” over the PA momentarily blotted out all other sound. Merl sighed. The karaoke machine was now in working order,

Purvis was pocketing a good sized tip, and the Texas Wildlife Service’ most game representative prepared to take the stage.

“Okay, Cap. I’ll keep an eye on things. You know where I am.”

“I sure do. Have a good one, Merl.”

[Next: Chapter Ten: The Ghosts of Faro Bagdad](ch10.md)
