[Jurassic Pouch](README.md)

[Previous: Chapter Eleven: Mérida](ch11.md)

# Chapter Twelve: The Yucatán Express

“I don’t believe it,” said Frances.

In the Perrera-Perez’s back yard lay a pair of shiny steel 
rails.

“Our tram only seats six,” explained S. Perrera-Perez as 
the couple rolled the vehicle out of its shelter. “There’s 
a one-peso tram that comes through on the hour, but the 
market will be closed by then: it's to take all the workers 
home when the shops close.” 

Feliz, MaryLiz, Jo, and Frances joined the Perrera-Perezes 
on the tram. After a thirty second wait for another tram 
to climb the hill past the little backyard station, the 
switch signal changed to green and the journey into town began.

MaryLiz looked between her feet at the ballast and sleepers 
whizzing past underneath as the tram rolled downhill. 

A red light blinked on the dashboard. MaryLiz had an 
astronaut’s aversion to blinking red lights, and it showed.

“Regenerative braking,” came Gaby's answer. “We’re storing 
energy for the trip back up.”

At the bottom of the hill, as the track leveled out, the 
tram automatically shunted into a siding to allow another 
tram to climb the main line in the other direction. Then 
they were off again, at a more leisurely pace along level grade.

Fifteen minutes later, the tram pulled into the Market 
Station. The Perrera-Perezes rented a rail stall for the 
little tram, and led the Ranchers down the stair to the market.

***

Gaby led the Ranchers among the narrow passageways between 
stalls to a brick-and-mortar building tucked down a side 
alley. A relative of Gaby’s, elderly, with Mayan features, 
was putting away a display table filled with used and 
new satellite phones.

Gaby spoke to them softly, in Spanish. Feliz could hear 
the words “gente pequeña” said by Gaby. The shop owner 
paused and turned to the ranchers.

“La gente pequeña. El bosque tiene muchos caminos...” The
elder turned back to Gaby, and spoke more softly.

Gaby thanked the elder, who smiled to the visitors,
and returned to closing shop.

Gaby asked Feliz, “You heard it? You want to tell them?”

Feliz said, “Yes. 'The Little People. The forest has 
many paths.' And there was a name, one I couldn’t make out.
Hunpah?”

MaryLiz asked Gaby, “Do you know what that means?”

Gaby replied, “Si. Hunapuh. It means no one in 
Yucatán will stop us from going where we’re going.”

***

The ride back to the Perrera-Perezes took much 
longer than on the way down. The couple were proud 
to point out its hand-built features, from the 
satellite-grade solar panels on its awning to 
upcycled electric wheelchair motors geared to 
every driving wheel. Gaby also told the incredulous 
Rocket Ranchers the origins of the miraculous system 
of light rail threaded throughout the inhabited 
parts of Yucatán. 

At the end of the 20th century, narrow gaugue rail 
built to exploit the land, and the plantation labor, 
of the Peninula, fell into ruin. Rights of way and 
repair contracts were abandoned by their nominal 
corporate owners, and forgotten by the Meican 
government, which had other things on its mind.

Most the old rail was stripped for salvage, some of the
track beds were repurposed as walking trails for tourists. 
There were historical markers, for each plantation, all
invisible against high grass.

Even after a century, however, hundreds of kilometers of 
rail, from the old plantations, remained, crisscrossed 
here and there with the modern rail ring surrounding the 
peninsula. Some of the network remained in semi-commercial 
passenger and light cargo service operated by local village 
concerns. 
 
As to what the government of Yucatán thought of the 
lost source of tax revenue and safety regulator’s 
nightmare operating under their noses, little was said. 

And then there were those occasional under-the-table 
shipments of fresh track ballast occasionally delivered 
to remote villages in the middle of the night....

“So,” said Gaby, as the tram pulled into their backyard 
siding. “The name Feliz said he couldn’t make out.”

“Hunpoo?” asked Feliz.

“Hunahpu”, said Gaby. “It’s Mayan.”

“And where is it?”, asked Frances. “In the forest, presumably?”

“It’s not a place,” said Gaby, “But it is in the forest. 
Hunahpuh is an old railway, a very old one, and we all 
have a ticket to ride.”

[Next: Chapter Thirteen: The Pool of Xblanque](ch13.md)
