[Previous Chapter](ch13.md) [TOC](README.md) [Next Chapter](ch15.md)

# Chapter Fourteen: The Hero Twins

The others grew quiet. 

Gaby spoke: 

“In Mayan mythology, two central figures are the Hero Twins, Hunahpu and Xblanque. The two become orphaned, and are ill-treated by the grandmother who takes them in, in favor of her own sons. But, the brothers are crafty, and soon get the better of their situation. That's why there are monkeys in the forest today, say the Maya, but that's another story.

“The two have many adventures together, some of them quite comical, violent, or both. They face their greatest test in the face of their enemy, the Lords of Xibalba, the twelve deities who, together, rule Xibalba, the Mayan underworld. 

"The Popol Vuh was orally transmitted by a single Mayan speaker to a single Spanish monk, after the Spanish conquistadores burned almost all of the written literature of the Maya. We can therefore never know what the written form of the legend stated, but in the telling we have, the Xibalbans appear to get the upper hand for a while, and are sure they've beaten the Hero Twins. 

"The Lords of Xibalba burn the Hero Twins to ashes, grind them into dust, and throw the dust into the river. But the Twins aren't daunted. Their bodies are restored by the water, and they return to life, first as catfish, then as young boys, then, in disguise, and under the noses of the Xibalbans, they return to wreak revenge.”

MaryLiz gazed out over the beautiful enclosed gorge, to all appearances untouched by human beings. “Was this place special to the Maya who lived around here? Were these, the them, the waters that restored the Hero Twins?”

“No, or, if so, it's not attested. We know lots of Maya place names for geographic features around here. Some are only known from ethnography, and others are still used by Maya speakers today, such as by mi familia in the market. This place has such a name, a classic Maya name. It translates to something like ‘inconveniently deep hole’. Nothing to do with the legend, nor to do with any other local legend. It’s about the most boring and literal name for something so beautiful that you could imagine.

“No, the name Pool of Xblanque appears to be revisionist, and recent. Among older people, it’s remembered as a tourist marketing name, something from a brochure they were paid a peso a day to hand out to visitors at the railway station. 'Take the Hunahpu Railway to the Pool of Xblanque.' The railway we just took was laid down using sections of rail, cannibalized from other parts of the system, around my great-grandparents’ time. The elders remember it, from not long into the 21st century.”

“But what about ‘La gente pequeña’, asked Feliz. “The little people. Is that another name for the Hero Twins?”

Gaby’s head shook once. “No. It’s something else that the old people remember, again from the advertising copy. “See the little people.” They say there used to be a spyglass, a coin-operated telescope, installed at the rim of the cenote. You could deposit a coin and look through the spyglass and see la gente pequeña, hopping around on the islands on the cenote floor.

Jo repeated the word. "Hopping.” Jo turned to Frances. “That’s why we get down there.”

Merl had unpacked the drone, and was powering up its controller.

MaryLiz was still digesting Gaby’s tale. “But, if they were so well known, advertised as a tourist attraction, even, why did people lose interest? Why aren’t there still tramloads of tourists coming out here today?”

Gaby looked genuinely puzzled for a moment. “I never really thought -- Oh! But it is protected now. All the private landowners were bought out, some of them forcibly, and displaced. The whole area is a State nature preserve. Like your National Parks, in the United States. A wilderness reserve.

Feliz said, “So the little people became a legend. Just a gimmick by some vanished local promoter that no one believed in any more, even those who remembered seeing them as children.”

Jo spoke up. “There’s nothing legendary about them. I want to know if there’s any still down there.”

MaryLiz said, “Merl’s way ahead of all of us.” Indeed, the drone was ready for takeoff, sitting on the flat surface of Merl’s outsized frame pack.

MaryLiz tested the motors of the drone, and the tiny robot rose a few feet above the ground. 

To Jo, the four motors sounded like a mutant barbershop quartet from Hell. “Stop stop stop!”, Jo cried, and the drone plopped silently to the ground. “You’ll just scare them off with that racket. It was bad enough back at the Gift when we at least had the noise of the surf to cover it up.”

It was a solid point. At the Gift, the team had searched for stationary cameras in a pile of stationary debris. The present mission was like looking for a particular galaxy in the Hubble Deep Field, but a skittish galaxy, with fast reflexes and an aversion to telescopes.

“Cap, could we land the drone?” said Merl. “Pick a spot between the trees and drop below the fog? Like Venera, on Venus. It won’t make any noise on the ground, if the props aren't running.”

“Could do,” said MaryLiz. “But it might be a one shot deal. Even if it lands without hitting anything, we don’t know what ground visibility is like at any given spot. And to take off again, even if I set it to retrace its inbound route, the accuracy may not be exact.” 

MaryLiz looked up towards the invisible latticework of GPS satellites overhead. “That’s an awfully deep hole. GPS will be degraded. Alternatives?”

Jo said, “I wish I’d brought a decent remote wildlife cam. The ones in my pack don’t transmit further than a few hundred meters. If we had a camera with long range radio, we could have the drone drop it off, monitor the stream from up here. And if pequeña is as obsessed with our cameras as their Texan cousins, it would makd perfect bait."

MaryLiz caught herself stealing a furtive glance at the brand-new camera lashed to Frances’ wrist.
 
Frances caught Bender, too. “Absolutely not. It’s got components from three different continents in it. I printed the housing myself. It cost twice the insurance payout for the stolen NASA cams that I had serial numbers for, and I’m pretty sure they’re going to reject my application to insure this one.”

The sounds of the forest made a beat of awkward silence more bearable.

“I’m getting it back,” said Frances, loosening the lanyard and handing the device to Merl. “Or two more just like it, ballistic express shipment, on the Ranch’s dime.”

Merl attached the end of the camera’s lanyard to the jaws of the drone’s drop solenoid.

MaryLiz offered a wide strip of gauze from the medical kit. 

“A drogue chute. Something to keep the camera upright as it’s falling.” Merl tied it to the end of the lanyard just below the solenoid.

Frances said, “The case I designed is watertight, but I wasn’t thinking of impact resistance. I have no idea how it will fare when it lands, even with a bit of drag.”

Jo pulled off one boot and removed its pillow insole. “Impact resistance. Tape it to the bottom of the camera.”

This done, it was time for launch. 

MaryLiz piloted the drone past the edge of the cenote and aimed its camera downward, while Frances’ camera dangled a few inches below, facing dead ahead.

When the drone had passed a few meters out over the cenote, MaryLiz turned the craft to the right and began a long, anti-clockwise traverse of the sheer cylindrical wall. She tapped a button and the drone began a lidar scan of the ground beneath it, and the wall to its right. If she could train the drone, building its knowledge of the boundaries of the cenote from an altitude where GPS offered high precision, the drone could continue to interpolate its location from the new lidar map, even if native GPS precision deteriorated in the uncertain conditions beneath the fog boundary.

The first pass around the circumference took no more than ten minutes. By the time the circuit was half complete, MaryLiz had been confident enough in the gently curving geometry of the cenote wall to set the drone to guide its own flight a few meters inside the stadium-sized hollow cylinder.

As the drone flew towards them at the end of its orbit, Feliz gave a sigh of relief, which turned to puzzlement when the drone kept going, and appeared to perform a second pass, along the same path as the first.

“It’s spiraling in,” MaryLiz told Feliz. “It’s flying closer to the center each time, further away from the wall. Still at the same height. It’ll keep doing that by itself until we have a lidar map of the whole feature.”

Jo was monitoring the emerging lidar map, with software assist from Merl. A green circle against a black blackground. As they watched, it became apparent that the circle was growing thicker towards the inside, as the drone slowly filled in the spiral with its paintbrush of lidar data.

Merl adjusted the software, and the circle became the floor of a cylinder in 3D projection, the mapped surfaces of the cliff walls apparent as streaks of greater and lesser textural density. It was easy to see the layered stratigraphy of these uplifted and ancient thickly bedded coral reefs, older than the dinosaurs and considerably older than the nearby impact event which had more recently killed almost all of them.

Merl returned the view to top down orthographic projection. The drone had completed a fifth revolution and was beginning a sixth. Jo checked the scale of the emerging map. “The drone’s sending a scan of the floor that’s about 20 meters wide, but it’s set to more deeply overlap segments where the previous pass didn’t get data that it likes. That will happen more in forested areas, because the tree canopy confuses the lidar algorithm. The radius of the cenote is… right at 600 meters. So we have around 30 more orbits, at least, but each one takes less time… We’ll be done with the first survey in an hour and a half.

Merl raised a finger: “The drone's going to want a fresh battery not long after that. We have three more, all fully charged, but we'll have to bring it in to change it out before it dies, or show's over.”

“Very well,” said MaryLiz. “I can set a low battery action. The drone will come back to base on its own when its battery gets low. I’ll watch its charge level just to make sure."

Jo seemed oblivious to most of what Cap had said. 

"Jo, don’t go crosseyed staring at the lidar, it will complete itself. Once it's done, we'll have some things to think about.”

“I already have,” said the zoologist.

***

Frances had mail.

To: Frances Watson

From: P. J. McClintock

Subject: Inconveniently Deep Hole aka Xblanque.

Dear Frances,

I received the completed lidar scans from Merl about 12 minutes ago. Yep, that’s IDH, Inconveniently Deep Hole. We have 10 meter radar topographic scans of the Hole back to the early 2000s, and better than that for some years since. As far as I know, you’re the first ever to scan the entire surface at close range. The Pool of Xblanque, as you call it, occurs on survey maps back to the 1920s, just tagged by an elevation contour: the interior has no detail indicated at all. “Here be dragons.”

The name 'Inconveniently Deep Hole' crops up in cave literature around the same time, in reports of cenotes in the Yucatan. The thing about the name “Inconveniently Deep Hole” being a translation from Mayan is a myth, by the way, perhaps an invention of yellow journalism later taken as fact. No one knows what the feature was called by ancient people in the area.

Xblanque is not the largest cenote of the Yucatan, but large enough so that it displays some classic features associated with larger examples of such secondary karst structures. The trees are indeed growing on islands of collapse, connected by shallow pools above submerged breakdown resting on the cenote floor. Agree with your friend (?) Jo Stapledon that the large lighter colored mass in the center represents a flat plain on the largest of these collapse structures, largely occluded by tree canopy. A 3D rendered texture map of the reduced lidar map plus video would be of inestimable value, but the computing and staffing resources would be formidable, our own "Hilltopper" quantum computer cluster would take years to perform the analysis of your data set.

Am intrigued as to the greater scope of this research. I web searched Jo Stapledon and the only reference I could find was to a marsupial specialist in Australia. Is there another Jo Stapledon?

Best,

P. J. McClintock

Center For Karst Topgraphy Analysis

Western Kentucky University

[Previous Chapter](ch13.md) [TOC](README.md) [Next Chapter](ch15.md)
