[Previous Chapter](ch16.md) [Jurassic Pouch: TOC](README.md) [Next Chapter](ch18.md)

# Chapter Seventeen: The Blue Helmets

Jo awoke on the futon beneath the Perrera-Perez’s immaculately tuned piano.

Gaby was answering the door, with Feliz over Gaby’s shoulder. Now Bender was joining them at the door. Jo fought off a heavy blanket, and squirmed from out from under the foot pedals of the grand piano.

The government official at the door was speaking in English.

“There is no trouble. But we would very much like to speak with you, regarding what you have seen.”

“What have you seen?” asked Frances, getting up from the Perrera-Perez’s sofa. “We uploaded all we had last night, that’s all we have. We’re still waking up, here. If you know where we were last night,”

Frances gestured towards the other sleepy adventurers in the room, “you know what an imposition this is on our hosts.”

Jo was now standing with the others. The parlor was quite warm.

The representative at the door said, “There are other…. Considerations? Factors? That you don’t know about. We have information for you, but we have questions as well.” A pause. “My name is Agent Jane, from UNESCO. Dr Stapledon, if you can hear me, we spoke once on the phone.”

MaryLiz shot a glance backward at Jo, who nodded.

MaryLiz stepped forward towards the crack in the door. Merl eased out of Cap’s way. Cap spoke.

“I’m MaryLiz Bender. This is my project. I’m here as a guest of the Perrera-Perez family, and my team, here at my request, are also their guests. We’re here in the name of private scientific research. As such,” Bender gestured towards her friends, “we’re not awfully big on having secrets, especially scientific ones.”

The silence in the room let the agent at the door know that this was true. The agent turned to the rest of the forces on the stair, and sent them away. “May I come in to talk?” said Jane.

Gaby unlocked the chain, and the agent was let in. Merl moved over on the Perrera-Perez’s love seat to make room for the agent to be seated. 

“So,” said Bender, to Agent Jane, “You go first.”

Jane drew a breath. “You’re the Rocket Ranchers, so you don’t need to be reminded of the Cold War.”

“From the way you cop-knocked the door, it would seem like it’s still on,” said Gaby.

“It’s not,” said Agent Jane. “It’s really not. But that period of human history, fueled by nuclear material and the fear of its misuse, has cast a long shadow. There are still people alive today who remember the Nuclear Scare when they were children. All the surviving ones, of course, are elderly, but a still smaller few of those still have an interest in government, and the long term impact of that time that more of the living have forgotten than remember.

“We know of your mitochondrial DNA studies. Your best datum for the founding female, the one you call Wallabeve, is 1950.

“It’s unfortunate that you settled on that date, it’s a ‘cursed date’ in radionucleide dating. We were skeptical at first. It was like the first measurement of the height of Mount Everest coming out to exactly 28,000 feet. The discoverer added a few extra feet, purposefully skewing the figure so that it'd be believed. But moreover, 1950 is the zero date for radiocarbon dating. Partly because the science was first being developed around that point….”

“But mostly,” said Frances, “because of nuclear weapons testing. Before the Comprehensive Ban. The world got coated in radioactivity, poisonous to radiocarbon dating studies, and other living things.”

Jane paused. “Yes. So it looked like you were all saying, “We don’t know, somewhere around the year 0 Before Present, where Before Present equals 1950.”

Jo spoke up. “But that’s not how we got that figure.”

Jane nodded. “Yes, not from nucleIDEs, but nucleoTIDEs. Your mitochondrial Wallabeve. Genetic
clocks, operating on completely different principles. Gestation period. Dropping size. Temporal isolation between successive generations. It was all there.”

Frances protested. “You said you had information for us. 1950, we already suspected that. You’ve offered us nothing. You’re just baiting us.”

“All right,” said Jane. “This is what we know.”

[Previous Chapter](ch16.md) [Jurassic Pouch: TOC](README.md) [Next Chapter](ch18.md)
